# FreightTrain

#### FreightTrain is a full-stack DSL for representing collections that can be edited inline.

FreightTrain is especially useful for:

- Rendering light-weight models as lists or tables
- Enabling users to create, update, and destroy objects with AJAX calls
- Editing objects' attributes using JavaScript without sending a request to the server



## Installation

#### For Rails 3:

    rails plugin install git://github.com/boblail/freight_train.git

The path `assets\javascripts\freight_train` contains JavaScripts that should be copied to your `public` path. I recommend symlinking the folder like this:

    cd public/javascripts; ln -s ../../vendor/plugins/freight_train/assets/javascripts/freight_train freight_train 

#### For Rails 2:

Rails 2 support has been deprecated from the `master` branch. To use FreightTrain with Rails 2, see the [`rails2` branch](https://github.com/boblail/freight_train/tree/rails2).



## Getting Started

### Creating a sample application

Let's say we're creating a simple to-do list application:

    rails new to-do-list
    cd to-do-list
    rails generate scaffold ToDoItem description:string
    rake db:create db:migrate
    rails server
    
You should be able to see the scaffolded app at [http://localhost:3000/to_do_items](http://localhost:3000/to_do_items). Add a few items so we can play with them later.



### Using FreightTrain

Now let's see what FreightTrain can do. Install the plugin as described above. Then add `include FreightTrain` to your `ApplicationController` and `<%= include_freight_train :adapter => :prototype %>` to your layout. Mine now look like this:

#### controllers/application_controller.rb:

    class ApplicationController < ActionController::Base
      include FreightTrain
      protect_from_forgery
    end 

#### views/layouts/application.html.erb:

    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html>
    <head>
      <title>TestApp</title>
      <%= stylesheet_link_tag :all %>
      <%= javascript_include_tag :defaults %>
      <%= csrf_meta_tag %>
    </head>
    <body>

    <%= yield %>

    <%= include_freight_train :adapter => :prototype %>
    </body>
    </html>

_(Note that I set `:adapter => :prototype`. If you are using jQuery, just set that to `:adapter => :jquery`.)_

Now, open app/views/to_do_items/index.html.erb and replace the `<table>` tag and everything inside it with `<% table_for :to_do_items %>`:

#### views/to_do_items/index.html.erb:

    <h1>Listing to_do_items</h1>

    <% table_for :to_do_items %>

    <br />

    <%= link_to 'New to_do_item', new_to_do_item_path %>

The `table_for` command sets FreightTrain to work with the collection we've supplied, `:to_do_items`. FreightTrain will generate everything you need to list, edit, and delete the items belonging to that collection. But we need to tell FreightTrain how we'd like each item to be rendered. We do this by creating a partial for named **to_do_item**:

#### views/to_do_items/_to_do_item.html.erb:

    <% row_for to_do_item do |row| %>
      <%= row.text_of :description %>
    <% end %>

Re-launch your server and you should see a simple one-column table that lists each item you've created.



### Editing and Deleting in FreightTrain

To make FreightTrain interactive, we first need to set up our controller so that it lets FreightTrain respond to AJAX calls. To do this we add `uses_freight_train` to any controller that will use FreightTrain. This method causes the controller to use FreightTrain's Responder (For more information about Responders in Rails 3, read [Default RESTful Rendering](http://edgerails.info/articles/what-s-new-in-edge-rails/2009/08/10/what-s-new-in-edge-rails-default-restful-rendering/) by Ryan Daigle on [EdgeRails](edgerails.info).)

Your scaffold-generated controller will need to be refactored to use the new `responds_with` convention:

#### controllers/to_do_items_controller:

    class ToDoItemsController < ApplicationController
      uses_freight_train
      respond_to :html
  
      def index
        @to_do_items = ToDoItem.all
        respond_with @to_do_items
      end

      def new
        @to_do_item = ToDoItem.new
        respond_with @to_do_item
      end

      def create
        @to_do_item = ToDoItem.new(params[:to_do_item])
        @to_do_item.save
        respond_with @to_do_item
      end

      def update
        @to_do_item = ToDoItem.find(params[:id])
        @to_do_item.update_attributes(params[:to_do_item])
        respond_with @to_do_item
      end

      def destroy
        @to_do_item = ToDoItem.find(params[:id])
        @to_do_item.destroy
        respond_with @to_do_item
      end
    end

Now, let's build an editor for our to-do list items. In `index.html.erb`, we'll replace `<% table_for :to_do_items %>` with `<% table_for :to_do_items do |ft| %>` which gives us more control over the table that's created:

#### views/to_do_items/index.html.erb:

    <% table_for :to_do_items do |ft| %>
      <% ft.headings do %>
        <th>Description</th>
      <% end %>
      <%= ft.editor do |editor| %>
        <td><%= editor.text_field :description %></td>
      <% end %>
    <% end %>
    
Finally, FreightTrain supplies a JavaScript helper method to facilitate deleting records. That method is named `FT.#{Model Name}.destroy` (in our case `FT.ToDoItem.destroy`) and it accepts the id of the object to destroy. You can call this method manually, or use a FreightTrain convenience parameter to scaffold a delete link. To scaffold the link, add `:commands => [:delete]` to `row_for`:

#### views/to_do_items/_to_do_item.html.erb:

  <% row_for to_do_item, :commands => [:delete] do |row| %>
    <%= row.text_of :description %>
  <% end %>



### Events

When FreightTrain's Responder creates, updates, or destroys a record, it fires an event: `ft:create`, `ft:update`, and `ft:destroy` respectively. `ft:create` and `ft:update` are fired from the row affected.

To use these events to highlight the changes that have been made to the page, add this code to the bottom of your layout (assuming you're using Prototype):

    <script type="text/javascript">
      document.observe('dom:loaded', function(){
        document.body.observe('ft:update', function(event){
          var element = event.element();
          if(element) {
            element.highlight();
          }
        });
      });
    </script>

